# How to create an AMP page for your dynamic content in Rails

[Google AMP](https://www.ampproject.org) is here. And it's great!

AMP is a new standard to create faster mobile pages, built on top of HTML, that allows instant page load.

**How to setup an AMP page for user generated articles in Rails?** Here's my tutorial!

First of all, I created an example repository [here](http://github.com/ProGM/rails-google-amp-example). I'm using it as reference for this article.

## Introduction

Let's start with a Model!

In my example we have an `Article` model, that stores a `title` and a `content`. The content can store some HTML generated by a WYSIWYG editor, like [`Tinymce`](http://tinymce.com).

    class Article < ActiveRecord::Base
      belongs_to :user
      validates :title, :content, presence: true
    end

And here's it's controller:

    class ArticlesController < ApplicationController
      def show
        @article = Article.find(params[:id])
      end
    end

The view:

    <h1><%= @article.title %></h1>
    <p><%= @article.content.html_safe %></p>

and it's router:

    resources :articles, only: :show

Not more than a standard template for a rails app.
Now, what we want is to create an alternative view for this article page, that follows the AMP standard.

## Define a new mime type

An easy way to create a new view for existing pages, without changing the controller, is to define a new mime type.
For example, we want that `/articles/1` loads our standard article. Instead, loading `/articles/1.amp` will load it's AMP version.

First of all, let's create our mime type, adding it to our `config/initializers/mime_types.rb`:

    Mime::Type.register 'text/html', :amp

Now, let's create a new layout and a new view.

app/views/layouts/application.amp.erb:

    <!doctype html>
    <html ⚡>
      <head>
        <meta charset="utf-8">
        <link rel="canonical" href="<%= url_for(format: :html, only_path: false) %>" >
        <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,minimum-scale=1,initial-scale=1">
        <style amp-boilerplate>body{-webkit-animation:-amp-start 8s steps(1,end) 0s 1 normal both;-moz-animation:-amp-start 8s steps(1,end) 0s 1 normal both;-ms-animation:-amp-start 8s steps(1,end) 0s 1 normal both;animation:-amp-start 8s steps(1,end) 0s 1 normal both}@-webkit-keyframes -amp-start{from{visibility:hidden}to{visibility:visible}}@-moz-keyframes -amp-start{from{visibility:hidden}to{visibility:visible}}@-ms-keyframes -amp-start{from{visibility:hidden}to{visibility:visible}}@-o-keyframes -amp-start{from{visibility:hidden}to{visibility:visible}}@keyframes -amp-start{from{visibility:hidden}to{visibility:visible}}</style><noscript><style amp-boilerplate>body{-webkit-animation:none;-moz-animation:none;-ms-animation:none;animation:none}</style></noscript>
        <script async src="https://cdn.ampproject.org/v0.js"></script>
        <script async custom-element="amp-iframe" src="https://cdn.ampproject.org/v0/amp-iframe-0.1.js"></script>
        <script async custom-element="amp-youtube" src="https://cdn.ampproject.org/v0/amp-youtube-0.1.js"></script>
      </head>
      <body>
        <div class="amp">
          <%= yield %>
        </div>
      </body>
    </html>

As you can see, it's substantially the default AMP HTML template, [found here](https://github.com/ampproject/amphtml). I injected also `amp-iframe` and `amp-youtube` custom tags, since my articles could contain embedded videos. Moreover I defined the canonical link rel, that refers to my non-AMP version of the page. This is done simpy using `url_for` method, passing the `html` format.

Ok! Now we can define our custom view for this article in `app/views/articles/show.amp.erb`

## Work with custom css
AMP requires to include only embedded css, not external `<link>` tags. Here's a trick to continue using our assets pipeline and the compiled css in our view.

First of all, let's create a new sass file under `app/assets/stylesheets/amp/application.scss`:

    body {
      ...some styles here...
    }

Now, let's register it in the precompilation, by adding this line to our `config/application.rb` file.

    config.assets.precompile << 'amp/application.scss'

This says to rails to compile it as a file, instead of bundling inside our standard application.css.

Now, let's add this in our layout `<head>`:

    <% if Rails.application.assets && Rails.application.assets['amp/application'] %>
    <style amp-custom><%= Rails.application.assets['amp/application'].to_s.html_safe %></style>
    <% else %>
    <style amp-custom><%= File.read "#{Rails.root}/public#{stylesheet_path('amp/application', host: nil)}" %></style>
    <% end %>


This simply copies all the sass compiled in our view.
There are two cases:
* In development, we can use the `Rails.application.assets` helper, that contains the sass compiled data of our files.
* In production, unfortunately, this variable is `nil`, but we can `read` the compiled file from the `public/assets` folder. Note that I use `stylesheet_path` with `host: nil`. This is because, normally, it appends the host name to the path.


## Rendering article content

Now we have a big problem. In our standard view, we could simply print our `@article.content` in a DOM, without any change.

AMP, instead, has many limitations on allowed tags. Moreover, there are also some tags that requires to be changed a bit to work in AMP. For example, an "img" tag becomes "amp-img". The same is for iframes.

How we can deal with this?
Well, my solution was to implement a custom [`scrubber`](https://github.com/rails/rails-html-sanitizer) for the ActionView built-in [`sanitize`](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionView/Helpers/SanitizeHelper.html#method-i-sanitize) method.

It uses a best-effort approach: It tries to convert as much as it can from the original DOM, and strips the unreadable parts, in order to make AMP page valid.

Here's how it looks like for now:

    class AmpScrubber < Rails::Html::PermitScrubber
      TAG_MAPPINGS = {
        'img' => lambda { |node|
          if node['width'] && node['height']
            node.name = 'amp-img'
            node['layout'] = 'responsive'
            node['srcset'] = node['src']
          else
            node.remove
          end
        },
        'iframe' => lambda { |node|
          find_parent(node).add_child(node)

          node['src'] = node['src'].gsub(%r{^(\/\/|http:\/\/)}, 'https://')
          url = URI(node['src'])
          node['layout'] = 'responsive'

          if url.host.include?('youtube.com')
            node.name = 'amp-youtube'
            node['data-videoid'] = node['src'].match(%r{(\/embed\/|watch?v=)(.*)})[2]
            node.remove_attribute('src')
          else
            node.name = 'amp-iframe'
          end
        }
      }.freeze

      def initialize
        super
        @tags = %w(a em p span h1 h2 h3 h4 h5 h6 div strong s u br blockquote)
        @attributes = %w(style contenteditable frameborder allowfullscreen)
      end

      def self.find_parent(node)
        node = node.parent while node.parent
        node
      end

      protected

      def scrub_attribute?(name)
        !super
      end

      def scrub_node(node)
        if node.name.in?(TAG_MAPPINGS.keys)
          remap_node! node, TAG_MAPPINGS[node.name]
        else
          super
        end
      end

      def remap_node!(node, filter)
        case filter
        when String
          node.name = filter
        when Proc
          filter.call(node)
        end
      end
    end

And here's how to use it. Just create a file under `app/views/articles/show.amp.erb`

    <h1><%= @article.title %></h1>

    <div>
      <%= sanitize @article.content, scrubber: AmpScrubber.new %>
    </div>

You can check here the resulting view:

http://amp-example.herokuapp.com/articles/1.amp


## Refer our AMP page from our standard one

Now we have our AMP page. How to say Google to index it? Well, following the docs, we just have to add a few `<link rel>` tags in our main page head.

Here's how to edit our `layout.html.erb`:

    <link rel="canonical" href="<%= url_for(format: :html, only_path: false) %>" >
    <link rel="amphtml" href="<%= url_for(format: :amp, only_path: false) %>" >


## Conclusion

We have seen how to create an AMP version for our dynamic contents.

You can find the complete example on [github](http://github.com/ProGM/rails-google-amp-example).

Let me now if you have ideas, suggestions or concerns!
